WRECKAGE, LOOKING FOR ANSWERS.
THE BODY OF ANOTHER VICTIM IS
DISCOVERED, AS INVESTIGATORS
TURN THEIR ATTENTION TO THE
ENGINEER AT THE HELM OF THE
DEADLY AMTRAK DERAILMENT.
GOOD EVENING I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF, ALSO AHEAD THIS
THURSDAY.
A REGION IN CONFLICT, FM YEROMEN
TO IRAN.
PRESIDENT OBAMA MEETS WITH ARAB
ALLIES AT CAMP DAVID TO COOL
TENSIONS BETWEEN THE WEST AND
MIDEAST.
>> Ifill: PLUS, RAISING WAGES
FOR THE LOWEST PAID WORKERS.
Y SOWHME C.E.O.'S CHOOSE TO
INCREASE PAY, SAYING IT'S GOOD
FOR THE BOTTOM LINE.
>> THE IDEA WAS IF THAT PEOPLE
CAN'T MAKE ENDS MEET AT HOME
WITH FOOD AND WITH BENEFITS,
HEALTH, HEALTH CARE IN
PARTICULAR, HOW CAN THEY BE
PRESENT, ENGAGED, KNOWLEDGE
WORKERS IN THE WORKPLACE WHEN
THEY COME TO WORK?
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS "NEWSHOUR."
>> Ifill: THE SEARCH FOR ANSWERS
OF WHAT CAUSED THE DEADLY
DERAILMENT OF AN AMTRAK TRAIN
CONTINUED, AS THE FOCUS SHIFTED
TO THE ENGINEER.
>> Ifill: EMERGENCY CREWS WORKED
STEADILY FOR A SECOND DAY ON THE
WRECKAGE OF AMTRAK TRAIN 188 IN
NORTH PHILADELPHIA, AS OFFICIALS
CONFIRMED GRIM NEWS OF ANOTHER
DEATH.
>> WE UTILIZED OUR HYDRAULIC
TOOLS TO OPEN UP THE TRAIN A
LITTLE BIT MORE SO THAT WE CAN
REACH THE PERSON, AND WERE ABLE
TO EXTRICATE THAT PERSON AND
HAVE THEM TRANSPORTED TO THE
MEDICAL EXAMINER'S OFFICE.
>> Reporter: ALL 243 PASSENGERS
AND CREW ABOARD THE DERAILED
TRAIN HAVE NOW BEEN ACCOUNTED
FOR.
ACCORDING TO INVESTIGATORS, THE
TRAIN WAS MOVING AT 102 MILES AN
HOUR TUESDAY NIGHT, MORE THAN
ICE TWTHE SPEED LIMIT, WHEN IT
CAREENED OFF THE TRACKS.
AMID THE RESCUE AND SALVAGE,
ELSEWHERE IN PHILADELPHIA THIS
MORNING, A FREIGHT TRAIN ALSO
DERAILED IN AN UNRELATED
INCIDENT.
NO DEATHS OR INJURIES WERE
REPORTED.
THE AMTRAK TRAIN'S ENGINEER WAS
IDENTIFIED AS 32 YEAR OLD NEW
YORKER BRANDON BOSTIAN.
HE SUFFERED A CONCUSSION AND
OTHER INJURIES DURING THE CRASH
ON ABC'S "GOOD MORNING AMERICA"
BOSTIAN'S LAWYER ROBERT GOGGIN
SAID HIS CLIENT REMEMBERS
NOTHING OF THE WRECK.
>> HE HAS ABSOLUTELY NO
RECOLLECTION WHATSOEVER OF THE
EVENTS, I'M TOLD MEMORY WILL
RETURN AS CONCUSSION SYMPTOMS
SUBSIDE.
HE REMEMBERS COMING INTO THE
CURVE, HE REMEMBERS ATTEMPTING
TO REDUCE SPEED THEREAFTER HE
WAS THROWN AROUND KNOCKED OUT
JUST LIKE ALL THE OTHER
PASSENGERS ON THE TRAIN.
>> Reporter: GOGGIN ADDED
BOSTIAN HAD NOT BEEN DRINKING
AND THAT HIS CELL PHONE WAS
TURNED OFF AND STOWED AWAY AT
THE TIME OF THE ACCIDENT.
YESTERDAY, PHILADELPHIA MAYOR
MICHAEL NUTTER CALLED THE
ENGINEER "RECKLESS."
THIS AFTERNOON, NUTTER HAD
SOFTENED HIS TONE, BUT NOT HIS
MESSAGE:
>> I WAS EXPRESSIVE IN MY
LANGUAGE.
BUT I DON'T THINK THAT ANY
COMMON SENSE, RATIONAL PERSON
WOULD THINK THAT IT WAS OKAY TO
TRAVEL AT THAT LEVEL OF SPEED
KNOWING THAT THERE WAS A PRETTY
SIGNIFICANT RESTRICTION ON HOW
FAST YOU COULD GO THROUGH THAT
TURN.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, IN
WASHINGTON, THE SPEAKER OF THE
HOUSE, JOHN BOEHNER, DISMISSED
SUGGESTIONS THE DERAILMENT WAS A
DIRECT RESULT OF FEDERAL CUTS TO
AMTRAK'S BUDGET.
>> THEY STARTED THIS YESTERDAY
SAYING, ITS ALL ABOUT FUNDING
ITS ALL ABOUT FUNDING, WELL
OBVIOUSLY ITS NOT ABOUT FUNDING!
THE TRAIN WAS GOING TWICE THE
SPEED LIMIT.
ADEQUATE FUNDS WERE THERE, NO
MONEY WAS CUT FROM RAIL SAFETY.
>> Reporter: HE SPOKE THE DAY
AFTER A HOUSE COMMITTEE VOTED TO
CUT AMTRAK FUNDING BMOREY THAN
$250 MILLION.
AMTRAK OFFICIALS TODAY SAID THEY
HOPE TO RESTORE FULL SERVICE
THROUGHOUT THE NORTHEAST
CORRIDOR, THE NATION'S BUSIEST
RAIL SECTOR, BY EARLY NEXT WEEK.
>> Ifill: WE'LL TALK TO
>> LATE THIS EVENING, THE
N.T.S.B. SAID IN A PRESS
CONFERENCE THAT SHORTLY BEFORE
THE CRASH, THE TRAIN WAS GOING
THE SPEED LIMIT AND SUDDENLY
ACCELERATED.
PRESIDENT OBAMA ALSO SAID
TONIGHT THE COUNTRY NEEDS TO
INVEST IN INFRASTRUCTURE.
WE'LL TALK TO LAWMAKERS ABOUT
THE FUNDING DEBATE OVER AMTRAK
LATER IN THE PROGRAM.
>> Woodruff: IN OTHER NEWS
TODAY, MALAYSIA AND THAILAND
TURNED AWAY THREE MORE BOATS
CRAMMED WITH MORE THAN
1100 MIGRANTS.
A FLOOD OF PEOPLE FROM
BANGLADESH AND MYANMAR HAVE BEEN
ABANDONED AT SEA BY HUMAN
TRAFFICKERS AND THEN REFUSED
ENTRY TO THAILAND, MALAYSIA AND
INDONESIA.
SOME OF THE REFUGEES HAVE BEEN
TAKEN IN AND GIVEN SHELTER IN
THAILAND AND INDONESIA.
MANY ARE ROHINGYA MUSLIMS
FLEEING PERSECUTION IN MYANMAR.
BUT THE THAI PRIME MINISTER SAID
HIS COUNTRY DOESN'T HAVE THE
RESOURCES TO HOST EVERYONE.
RESOURCES TO HOST EVERYONE. >> (
translated): DO YOU
THINK
>> (translated): DO YOU
THINK WE CAN TAKE ON 3,000-4,000
WE CAN TAKE ON 3,000-4,000
PEOPLE?
WE'D HAVE TO FIND SPACE FOR THEM
AND HOLD THEM AS THEY GO THROUGH
LEGAL PROCESSES.
IF WE TAKE THEM ALL IN, THEN
ANYONE WHO WANTS TO COME WILL
COME FREELY.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE, THE HEAD
OF THE EUROPEAN UNION'S BORDER
AGENCY WARNED THE MIGRANT
PROBLEM IN EUROPE IS SET TO
GROW.
FABRICE LEGGERI SAID THERE'S A
SHIFT IN WHERE MIGRANTS ARE
TRYING TO ENTER EUROPE, FROM THE
CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN TO THE
EAST BY WAY OF TURKEY.
AS A RESULT, THE E.U. BORDER
AGENCY IS BOOSTING ITS
OPERATIONS NEAR GREECE IN COMING
WEEKS.
>> Ifill: THE TALIBAN CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY TODAY FOR A HOTEL
ATTACK THAT KILLED 14 PEOPLE IN
AFGHANISTAN'S CAPITAL.
THE DEAD INCLUDED AN AMERICAN, A
BRITISH CITIZEN, AN ILIANTA, TWO
PAKISTANIS, AND FOUR INDIAN
NATIONALS.
THE MILITANT GROUP SAID IT
TARGETED THE PARK PALACE HOTEL
LAST NIGHT BECAUSE IT'S POPULAR
WITH FOREIGNERS.
THE HOURS-LONG SIEGE ENDED EARLY
THIS MORNING.
KABUL'S POLICE CHIEF SAID IT'S
STILL UNCLEAR HOW THEY WERE ABLE
TO INFILTRATE THE BUILDING.
>> (translated): OUR
INVESTIGATIVE TEAMS ARE WORKING
TO FIGURE OUT HOW THE ATTACK
HAPPENED BECAUSE IT DID NOT
START WITH AN EXPLOSION AT THE
MAIN GATE OR THE KILLING OF
GUARDS.
WHATEVER IT WAS, IT STARTED FROM
INSIDE THE HOTEL.
OUR INVESTIGATIVE TEAMS ARE
WORKING TO FIGURE OUT HOW THESE
TERRORISTS MANAGED TO ENTER THE
GUEST HOUSE.
>> Ifill: POLICE SAID ALL THE
ATTACKERS WERE KILLED IN A
SHOOTOUT WITH AFGHAN TROOPS.
>> Woodruff: FIGHTING BROKE OUT
IN BURUNDI IN CENTRAL AFRICA
TODAY IN THE WAKE OF YESTERDAY'S
COUP ATTEMPT.
PLUMES OF SMOKE ROSE ABOVE THE
CAPITAL AND GUNFIRE RANG OUT IN
THE STREETS, AS FIGHTERS LOYAL
TO THE PRESIDENT BATTLED REBEL
FORCES.
THE PRESIDENT'S OFFICE SAID HE
WAS BACK IN THE COUNTRY.
HE'D BEEN IN TANZANIA WHEN THE
COUP ATTEMPT HAPPENED.
>> Ifill: IN NEPAL, THE PRIME
MINISTER ADMITTED HIS COUNTRY
WAS OVERWHELMED AND
UNDERPREPARED FOR ITS SECOND
EARTHQUAKE IN LESS THAN THREE
WEEKS.
AT LEAST 110 PEOPLE DIED IN
TUESDAY'S QUAKE.
APRIL'S EARTHQUAKE KILLED MORE
THAN 8,100 PEOPLE.
DAN RIVERS OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS TRAVELED BY
HELICOPTER FOR A REMOTE RESCUE
TODAY.
>> Reporter: FINALLY THE AWFUL
SCALE OF NEPAL'S SUFFERING IS
BEING LAID BARE.
THE BRIGHT ORANGE OF DOZENS OF
SHELTERS AMID THE RUBBLE.
WE'RE FLYING UP THE KHUMBU
VALLEY TOWARD MOUNT EVEREST.
OUR PILOT HAS BEEN TOLD OF A
WOMAN WHO NEEDS URGENT MEDICAL
CARE IN A REMOTE VILLAGE.
WE FLY EAST OVER A BUDDHIST NOW.
>> YOU CAN JUST ABOUT MAKE OUT
THE MONKS AROUND THE TEMPORARY
SHELTERS THEY PUT UP.
>> Reporter: THE MOUNTAINS ARE
SCARRED BY VIOLENT SEISMIC
ACTIVITY WHICH HAS LEFT THE
HILLSIDES DANGEROUSLY UNSTABLE.
AS WE APPROACH VILLAGE OF
AISELUKHARKA, WE'RE LOOKINFORG
A DISTRESS SIGNAL.
>> WE NEED TO FIND HER, LOOK FOR
HER.
>> IT'S SPOTTED, IT'S SPOTTED!
>> Reporter: FAR BELOW, A GROUP
OF PEOPLE AND A FAINT WISP OF
SMOKE.
BUIT'ST A TRICKY LANDING ON A
STEEP HILLSIDE.
WE FIND 40-YEAR-OLD GORI MAYABAN
ON A STRETCHER AND IN PAIN.
THE VILLAGES ARE CLEARLY
DISTRESSED BUT RELIEVED.
THEY SAY SHE HAS INTERNAL
BLEEDING AFTER BEING HIT BY
FALLING DEBRIS DURING TUESDAY'S
QUAKE.
THEY HAVENDUR EED NOT ONE BUT
TWO DISASTERS HERE., IT SHOWS.
THESE HELICOPTER FLIGHTS ARE THE
ONLY WAY INTO THESE REMOTE AREAS
OF NEPAL.
AND FOR THE INJURED, THEY ARE A
LIFELINE.
AS CAREFULLY AS THEY CAN, THEY
GET HER INTO THE HELICOPTER.
HER HUSBAND PRAKESH BIDS
FAREWELL TO THIS VILLAGE, CUT
OFF 6,000 FEET UP IN THE
HIMALAYAS.
THE WEATHER IS CLOSING IN.
AND OUR PILOT KNOWS HOW PERILOUS
THESE MOUNTAINS CAN BE.
45 MINUTES LATER, WE TOUCHED
DOWN AT A HOSPITAL IN KATHMANDU.
GORI MAYABAN IS RUSHED INSIDE
AND OUR PILOT RUSHES OFF ON
ANOTHER RESCUE.
>> Ifill: CREWS ARE STILL
SEARCHING FOR A MISSING U.S.
MARINE HELICOPTER THAT
DISAPPEARED TUESDAY WHILE
DELIVERING AID.
SO FAR THERE'S BEEN NO SIGN OF
THE SIX U.S. MARINES AND TWO
NEPALESE SOLDIERS ON BOARD.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THIS
COUNTRY, THE U.S. HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES VOTED
OVERWHELMINGLY TO PASS
LEGISLATION THAT WOULD LET
CONGRESS REVIEW AND EVEN REJECT
ANY NUCLEAR DEAL WITH IRAN.
THE VOTE WAS 400 TO 25 AND THE
BILL NOW GOES TO PRESIDENT
OBAMA.
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS HAVE
SAID HE WILL SIGN IT, AFTER
THREATS TO VETO AN EARLIER
VERSION.
LAWMAKERS IN THE SENATE REACHED
A COMPROMISE LAST WEEK THAT
DROPPED SOME OF THE BILL'S
TOUGHEST PROVISIONS.
>> Ifill: AN INSPECTOR GENERAL'S
REPORT UNVEILS EMBARRASSING NEW
DETAILS ABOUT THE TWO SECRET
SERVICE AGENTS WHO CRASHED THEIR
CAR IN FRONT OF THE WHITE HOUSE
EARLIER THIS YEAR.
THE REPORT SAID THE AGENTS SPENT
MORE THAN $100 ON DRINKS PRIOR
TO THE ACCIDENT, AND WERE QUOTE
"MORE LIKELY THAN NOT" IMPAIRED
BY ALCOHOL.
THEY ALSO WENT HOME WITHOUT
TAKING A SOBRIETY TEST.
ONE OF THE AGENTS IS RETIRING,
THE OTHER IS ON ADMINISTRATIVE
LEAVE.
>> Woodruff: ON WALL STREET
TODAY, STOCKS REBOUNDED AND
BROKE A THREE-DAY SLUMP ON
ENCOURAGING DATA ON THE U.S. JOB
MARKET.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 192 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
18,252.
THE NASDAQ ROSE NEARLY 70
POINTS.
AND THE S-AND-P 500 ADDED 22
PNTS.OI
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
LAWMAKERS DEBATE FUNDING FOR
AMTRAK;
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND ARAB LEADERS
CONVENE AT CAMP DAVID TO ADDRESS
CONFLICT IN THE MIDEAST;
SOLDIERS FIGHT BOKO HARAM TO
KEEP IT FROM CROSSING INTO
CAMEROON;
WHY BIG BUSINESS IS BACKING THE
TRADE DEAL WITH ASIA;
HOW INCREASING WAGES FOR THE
LOWEST PAID WORKERS CAN HELP THE
BOTTOM LINE;
AND, A PIONEER OF PROMOTING
ORGANIC FOOD INTO THE KITCHEN.
>> Ifill: FOLLOWING THE DEADLY
TRAIN DERAILMENT IN
PHILADELPHIA, A HOUSE COMMITTEE
VOTED TO CUT MONEY FOR AMTRAK'S
CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROGRAM.
THE MOVE SPARKED A FIGHT OVER
FUNDING INFRASTRUCTURE.
WE TALK TO A PAIR OF KEY
LAWMAKERS.
REPRESENTATIVE CHAKAH FATTAH IS
A DEMOCRAT FROM PENNSYLVANIA
WHOSE DISTRICT INCLUDES
PHILADELPHIA AND CONGRESSMAN
JOHN MICA IS A REPUBLICAN FROM
FLORIDA WHO SERVES ON THE HOUSE
TRANSPORTATION & INFRASTRUCTURE
COMMITTEE.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
CONGRESSMEN,IMENT TO ASK YOU
BOTH, STARTING WITH YOU, JOHN
MICA, DO YOU THINK CONGRESS HAS
ADEQUATELY FUNDED AMTRAK?
>> I THINK GIVEN AMTRAK'S
HISTORY OF POOR PERFORMANCE, I
THINK THEY'VE GIVEN THEM MORE
THAN ENOUGH MONEY, SUBS DIEGZ
LAST YEAR, FOR EXAMPLE, EVERY
TICKET ONAM TRACK, ALL 30.9
MILLION, $42 ON AVERAGE.
>> Ifill: CONGRESSMAN FATAH.
>> THERE'S NO PASSENGER RAIL IN
THE WORLD THAT IS NOT
SUBSIDIZED.
THAT'S NUMBER ONE.
THE PRESIDENT AND THE
TRANSPORTATION EXPERTS IN OUR
GOVERNMENT PROPOSED $2.4 BILLION
FOR CAPITAL AND SAFETY
IMPROVEMENTS THAT CONGRESS
YESTERDAY, ON THE APPROPRIATIONS
COMMITTEE, CUT THAT BY $1.3
BILLION.
I ASKED FOR US TO GO BACK TO THE
FROPRESIDENT'S REQUEST.
INSTEAD OF DOING THAT, WHAT THEY
DID WAS NOT HONOR THE INCREASE
THE PRESIDENT WANTED.
THEY CUT LAST YEAR'S
APPROPRIATION BY MORE THAN $250
MILLION.
SO I THINK THAT IT WOULD HAVE
BEEN BETTER NOT TO EVEN HAVE THE
COMMITTEE YESTERDAY BECAUSE IT
MURES INTO THE STORY ABOUT THE
THE TRAIN ACCIDENT IN
PHILADELPHIA.
BUT THIS WAS A COMMITTEE THAT
HAD BEEN SAID TO ME A MONTH AGO,
THE SUBCOMMITTEE HAD VOTED THESE
CUTS, AND THE MAJORITY DECIDED,
NOTWITHSTANDING WHAT HAPPENED IN
PHILADELPHIA THEY WANTED TO MAKE
THE POINT, AS YOU HEARD FROM MY
COLLEAGUE HERE, THAT THEY DON'T
THINK WE SHOULD BE SUBSIDIZING
PASSENGER RAIL.
I THINK WE SHOULD, AND I THINK
WE NEED TO INVEST THE DOLLARS
NECESSARY TO MAKE SURE THAT IT
IT'S SAFE.
>> Ifill: CONGRESSMAN MIKE
ASPEAKER BOEHNER SAID TODAY THIS
ACCIDENT WAS ABOUT SPEED, NOT
ABOUT INFRASTRUCTURE OR ABOUT
FUNDING AMTRAK IN GENERAL.
WAS THAT YOUR POINT OF VIEW AS
WELL?
>> WELL, THAT'S MY POINT OF
VIEW.
AND LET ME SAY, AGAIN, WHEN
PRESIDENT OBAMA WAS ELECTED, HE
WAS GOING TO CREATE HIGH-SPEED
RAIL IN THE UNITED STATES.
INSTEAD OF PUTTING IT IN A
NORTHEAST CORRIDOR, WHICH IS THE
ONLY TRACK, THE 600 MILES THAT
AMTRAK OWNS-- THE REST OF AMTRAK
RUNS OVER PRIVATE FREIGHT RAILS
-- HE TOOK $10 BILLION, ABOUT $6
BILLION GOING TO CALIFORNIA,
MOSTLY WHERE THERE'S FRUITS AND
VEGETABLES TO MOVE, ILL YOI
WHERE THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE
HIGH-SPEED RAIL WHICH RUNS ABOUT
65 MILES AN HOUR, $1.5 BILLION
THERE.
INSTEAD OF INVESTING IT IN THE
NORTHEAST CORRIDOR, WHERE WE
COULD HAVE HIGH-SPEED RAIL,
WHERE WE HAVE THE CONNECTIONS,
WE COULD HAVE THE REVENUE AND
EXPAND THE SYSTEM.
>> Ifill: SO ARE YOU SAYING
THAT IF THE PRESIDENT HAD SPENT
MONEY THAT WAS ALREADY ALLOCATED
DIFFERENTLY, AN ACCIDENT LIKE
YESTERDAY WOULD HAVE BEEN LESS
LIKELY.
>> WE COULDN'T HAVE IN THE
NORTHEAST CORRIDOR, HIGH-SPEED
SERVICE AND DRAMATIC REVENUES
AND EXCHANGED THE PATTERN OF
TRAFFIC.
THERE ARE, CONTRARY TO WHAT MY
COLLEAGUE HAS SAID, THERE ARE
SYSTEMS THAT DO MAKE MONEY.
VIRGIN RAIL INSTALLED IN THE
NORTH-SOUTH FROM LONDON TO NORTH
ENGLAND ROUTE, THEY INCREASED
PASSENGERS FROM 14 MILLION TO 28
MILLION, WENT FR AOM DEFICIT OF
040 MILLION, SUBSIDIZED BY THE
FEDERAL-- THE BRITISH
GOVERNMENT, TO THAT MUCH IN
REVENUE COMING IN TO THE BRITISH
TREASURY IN 10 YEARS GLOOIFL
WELL, LET ME --
>> THE MOD CELL THERE ACROSS THE
WORLD, AND WE'RE A THIRD-WORLD
SOVIET STYLE TRAIN OPERATION.
>> Ifill: LET ME LET YOUR
COLLEAGUE RESPOND TO THAT.
>> YOU DON'T HAVE TO LISTEN TO A
REPUBLICAN OR DEMOCRAT
REPRESENTATIVE FROM CONGRESS.
WE HAVE THE NATIONAL
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD, AND
THEY HAVE SAID IN TERMS OF THE
PHILADELPHIA ACCIDENT, THAT IT
WOULD NOT HAVE HAPPENED IF WE
HAD POSITIVE TRAIN CONTROL.
WE KNOW THAT THAT INVESTMENT
COULD HAVE BEEN MADE.
IT HASN'T BEEN MADE.
SO WE HEAR NOT FROM POLITICIANS
BUT FROM EXPERTS THAT, YES, WE
COULD HAVE SAFE PASSENGER RAIL
TRAVEL IN OUR COUNTRY.
WE HAVE TO MAKE THE INVESTMENT
NEEDED TO DO SO.
>> Ifill: WHEN YOU SAY
"POSITIVE TRAIN CONTROL" I JUST
WANT TO MAKE SURE EVERYONE
UNDERSTANDS, THAT WOULD
AUTOMATICALLY OVERRIDE THE
ENGINEER, SLOW A TRAIN THAT WAS
GOING FASTER THAN THE SPEED
LIMIT.
YOU BELIEVE-- NOW THAT'S
SUPPOSED TO BE IN ALL TRAINS BY
THE END OF THIS YEAR.
DO YOU THINK THAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN OR IS THAT GOING TO BE
DELAYED?
WELL, THE CONGRESS HAS MANDATED
IT BY THE END OF THE YEAR.
THERE WERE A NUMBER OF MEMBERS
IN THE SENATE WHO WANTED TO
DELAY IT TO 2020.
I DON'T THINK THERE'S GOING TO
BE ANY DELAY NOW.
I THINK WE ARE GOING TO MOVE
FORWARD, AND THE TECHNOLOGY SAVE
LIVES AT LEAST BASED ON WHAT
EXPERTS SAY, NOT ON WHAT
POLITICIANS SAY.
THERE'S A DEBATE WHETHER
BWHETHER WE SHOULD HAVE
PASSENGER RAIL AND WHETHER WE
SHOULD SUBSIDIZE IT.
THE POINT IS WE HAVE IT AND WE
SHOULD MAKE SURE IT'S SAFE.
JUST LIKE WE WANT BRIDGES AND
HORIZON TO BE SAFE.
WE HAVE TO INVEST IN
INFRASTRUCTURE.
WE HAVE THE WORLD ECONOMIC
FORUM-- SINCE MY COLLEAGUE WANTS
TO TALK ABOUT INTERNATIONAL
MEASUREMENTS-- SAYS AMERICA HAS
THE 12th WORST
INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE WORLD.
SO, YOU KNOW, IF THE
GOVERNMENT'S NOT GOING TO STEP
UP TO ITS RESPONSIBILITY, THEN
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO HAVE
OUR ECONOMY TAKE A BACK SEAT.
>> Ifill: CONGRESSMAN MICA,
HOW MUCH OF THIS IS ABOUT
IDEOLOGY, WHEN IT COMES RIGHT
DOWN TO IT, THAT YOU AND YOUR
PARTY JUST DON'T AGREE THIS
SHOULD BE A PUBLIC RAIL SYSTEM
AND THEY BELIEVE THERE SHOULD BE
MORE SPENT?
>> GWEN, YOU'RE TALKING TO ONE
OF THE MOST STRONG-- WELL, THE
STRONGEST ADVOCATE IN CONGRESS
FOR PASSENGER RAIL.
IT'S COST EFFECTIVE.
WE SHOULD HAVE IT.
IN FACT, I PUT IN THE LAST
PASSENGER RAIL BILL THAT WE
PASSED THE CREATIONAVE NORTHEAST
CORRIDOR COMMISSION, WHICH I
TRIED TO EMPOWER TO GET THEM TO
ADVANCE IMPROVEMENTS.
THEY JUST CAME OUT WITH A REPORT
TWO WEEKS AGO, AND I SUPPORT
THAT REPORT.
IT CALLS FOR $20 BILLION.
BUT CONGRESS ISN'T GOING TO GIVE
IT TO AMTRAK, WHICH FUMBLES
EVERY BIT OF ACQUISITION MONEY,
AND THEY-- THEY'VE HAD THE MONEY
SINCE OCTOBER TO PUT IN THE
POSITIVE TRAIN CONTROL, AND THE
OTHER IMPROVEMENTS, AND THEY
DIDN'T DO IT.
SO THAT COULD HAVE BEEN AVOIDED
IF THEY'D CONSIDERED SAFETY
FIRST WHEN THEY SPENT WILL MORE
THAN $1 BILLION WE GAVE THEM
LAST OCTOBER.
>> Ifill: CONGRESSMAN MICA I
GAVE YOU THE FIRST WORD, LET ME
GIVE CONGRESSMAN FATTAH THE LAST
WORD.
>> IT'S TRUE MY COLLEAGUE PUT IN
PLACE THIS COMMISSION.
HE WASSED TWO HAVE
228-MILE-PER-HOUR TRAINS IN THE
NORTHEAST CORRIDOR.
THEY CALL FOR NOT $20 BILLION
BUT $117 BILLION IN INVESTMENTS
IN ORDER TO HAVE THAT HAPPEN.
I THINK THAT WOULD MOVE OUR
ECONOMY FORWARD.
IT'S GOING TO NEED THE
INVESTMENT OF THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT IF THAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN.
AND SO I SUPPORT HIM IF THAT'S
THE WAY WE'RE GOG PROCEED.
>> Ifill: JOHN MICA,
REPUBLICAN OF FLORIDA,
CONGRESSMAN CHAKAH FATTAH,
DEMOCRAT FROM PENNSYLVANIA, A
FUNDAMENTALLY DIFFERENT POINT OF
VIEW ON A VERY SERIOUS ISSUE.
THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: DIFFA ERENT LOOK NOW
AT THE ACCIDENT IN PHILADELPHIA,
AND HOW THE CITIZENS OF THE CITY
OF BROTHERLY LOVE ARE HELPING
THE VICTIMS HOWEVER THEY CAN.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE HAS
OUR STORY.
Rep>>orter: A SECOND DAY OF
CLEANUP AND RECOVERY HERE IN THE
PORT RICHMOND SECTION OF
PHILADELPHIA, WHERE AMTRAK TRAIN
188 DERAILED TUESDAY NIGHT.
WHILE FEDERAL INVESTIGATORS
CONTINUE TO PORE OVER THE
EVIDENCE, REGIONAL RED CROSS
OFFICIALS LIKE LEO PRATTE HAVE
TURNED OUT TO HELP VICTIMS AND
THEIR FAMILIES.
>> WE'RE GOING TO BE WORKING ON
THE MENTAL HEALTH STATUS WITH
ALL THE FAMILIES THAT ARE
INVOLVED IN THE SITUATION, AND
THAT'S WHERE DISASTER AND MENTAL
HEALTH TEAM COME INTO PLAY AND
OUR SPIRITUAL CARE TEAMS WILL
COME INTO PLAY.
>> SO ALL OUR CAMERAS GO AWAY,
YOU GUYS STAY HERE.
>> YES SIR.
>> Reporter: PRATTE AND HIS
GROUP OF VOLUNTEERS HAVE SET UP
A RELIEF CENTER AT A MARRIOTT
HOTEL IN DOWNTOWN PHILADELPHIA.
>> THE FACT THAT IT HAPPENED IN
THIS CITY AND EVERYBODY STEPS UP
TO THE PLATE WHEN SOMETHING LIKE
THIS HAPPENS IS ONE OF THE GREAT
THINGS ABOUT THE ORGANIZATION
SUCH AS THE RED CROSS IS THAT
IT'S DRIVEN BY VOLUNTEERS, IT'S
RAN BY VOLUNTEERS, AND THESE ARE
PEOPLE WHO ARE DOING THEIR JOB
EVERY DAY LING LVIIFE NORMAL AND
WHEN SOMETHING LIKE THIS HAPPENS
THEY DROP EVERYTHING.
>> Reporter: HIS TEAM WILL BE
HERE AS LONG AS THEY'RE NEEDED.
RED CROSS OFFICIALS ARE OFTEN
THE FIRST ON THE SCENE AFTER
TRAGEDIES LIKE TUESDAY'S
DERAILMENT.
BUT HERE IN THE CITY OF
BROTHERLY LOVE, EVERY-DAY
RESIDENTS ARE LIVING UP TO THAT
NICKNAME AS WELL, DONATING THEIR
TIME, EFFORT, AND EVEN
TECHNOLOGICAL KNOW-HOW TO THE
RECOVERY EFFORT.
WHEN PATRICK MURPHY FIRST
LEARNED ABOUT TUESDAY'S CRASH,
HE KNEW HIS COMPANY COULD HELP.
>> WE HAPPEN TO BE RIGHT NEXT
DOOR TO WHERE THE AMTRAK CRASH
HAPPENED IN PHILADELPHIA.
>> Reporter: MURPHY'S COMPANY,
CALLED GRIDLESS POWER, MAKES
COMPACT BATTERY PACKS, ALLOWING
FIRST RESPONDERS TO POWER THEIR
PHONES, LAPTOPS, AND LIGHTS FOR
POTENTIALLY DAYS ON A SINGLE
ONE-HOUR CHARGE.
>> IT'S A BIG BATTERY PACK THAT
CAN BE CHARGED FROM WHATEVER
POWER'S AVAILABLE.
SO IT ALLOWS A RESPONDER TO GO
INTO A DISASTER ZONE.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT
WATT OUTLETS OR PLUGS.
YOU CAN PUT THE SYSTEM DOWN,
PUSH THE ON BUTTON, AND THEN
YOU'RE GOOD TO GO.
YOU'VE GOT POWER WHEREVER YOU
NEED.
>> Reporter: THE COMPANY HAS
PROVIDED THESE 50-POUND BATTERY
PACKS TO EMERGENCY OFFICIALS IN
PLACES LIKE NEW JERSEY AFTER
HURRICANE SANDY AND NEPAL
FOLLOWING THE RECENT
EARTHQUAKES.
BUT MURPHY SAYS HE NEVER THOUGHT
HE'D BE ABLE TO PUT THEM TO GOOD
USE SO CLOSE TO HIS HOMETOWN.
THEY'VE OFFERED FOUR OF THEIR
UNITS TO EMEENCYRG OFFICIALS
HERE IN PHILLY SO FAR.
>> THERE WERE NO COMPLAINTS FROM
ANY OF THE GUYS HERE.
YOU KNOW AMTRAK, A TRAIN JUST
DERAILED.
I KNOW IT'S AFTER WORK HOURS,
THIS WAS TEN THIRTY AT NIGHT.
LET'S JUST GO SEE IF WE CAN
HELP.
>> Reporter: MINISTER JOE
FURJANIC ALSO FELT COMPELLED TO.
HIS CONGREGATION, THE BLOCK
CHURCH, IS JUST BLOCKS AWAY FROM
WHERE THE TRAIN SKIDDED OFF THE
TRACKS.
>> THIS IS WHAT WE DO.
HIS TIS WHO WE ARE, AND YOU
KNOW, LET'S MEET A NEED.
IF THERE'S A NEED LET'S MEET IT.
>> Reporter: FURJANIC, HIS WIFE,
AND SOME OF THE CHURCH'S
PARISHIONERS QUICKLY GOT TO THE
SCENE TO PASS OUT WATER BOTTLES
AND CLEAN UP GARBAGE.
THEY HAVEN'T LEFT SINCE.
>> LOOK IT WASN'T EVEN-- IT'S
NOT LIKE A BUNCH OF OUR PEOPLE
WERE IN THE TRAIN WRECK, YOU
KNOW, IT WAS PEOPLE COMMUTING
AND STUFF LIKE THAT, BUT JUST
THE ENERGY AND I THINK THE
PASSION OF JUST OUR CHURCH, YOU
KNOW, HERWE AE RE, THIS IS OUR
BLOCK, THIS IS OUR NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> Reporter: FURJANIC SAYS IT'S
A SMALL EFFORT, BUT HIS CHURCH
WILL BE HERE FOR THE REST OF THE
WEEK, HELPING OUT WHEREVER THEY
CAN.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, I'M
STEPHEN FEE AT THE SITE OF THE
AMTRAK CRASH IN PHILADELPHIA.
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA
ATTEMPTED TO MEND FENCES WITH
CONCERNED PARTNERS IN THE ARAB
WORLD TODAY.
CHIEF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
CORRESPONDENT MARGARET WARNER
REPORTS.
>> Warner: THE GATHERING IN THE
WOODLAND PRESIDENTIAL GETAWAY OF
CAMP DAVID WAS DESIGNED TO COOL
TENSIONS BETWEEN THE U.S. AND
SOME ITS KEY PERSIAN GULF ALLIES
IN THE MIDDLE EAST, REASSURING
THEM OF U.S. BACKING AMID
REGIONAL UPHEAVAL AND HEARING
THEIR CONCERNS ABOUT THE U.S.
NUCLEAR TALKS WITH IRAN.
BUT DEPUTY NATIONAL SECURITY
ADVISER, BEN RHODES, SAID THE
MEETING WITH SIX MEMBERS OF ETH
G.C.C., THE GULF COOPERATION
COUNCIL, WOULD NOT PRODUCE A
NATO-LIKE SECURITY TREATY, WHICH
SOME HAD SOUGHT.
>> WE'RE NOT INITIATING
TREATIES, MUTUAL DEFENSE
TREATIES WITH OUR G.C.C.
PARTNERS.
THE INTEREST IN THAT TYPE OF
ARRANGEMENT I WILL TELL YOU HAS
NOT BEEN UNIFORM ACROSS THE
G.C.C.
>> Warner: EVEN BEFORE LEADERS
ARRIVED HERE IN THE MARYLAND
MOUNTAINS, THE DIVISIONS WERE
CLEAR.
OF THE GULF STATES IN
ATTENDANCE, SAUDI ARABIA, QATAR,
U.A.E., KUWAIT, OMAN AND
BAHRAIN, ONLY TWO SENT THEIR
HEADS OF STATE.
THE MOST NOTABLE MISSING FIGURE?
THE NEW SAUDI KING SALMAN.
HE BACKED OUT JUST DAYS AFTER
THE ADMINISTRATION SAID HE'D
TAKE PART.
THOUGH THE WHITE HOUSE DENIED
HIS ABSENCE WAS A SNUB.
THE TENSIONS OVER THE WEST'S
PURSUIT OF A DEAL TO CURB SHIITE
IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM BEFORE
THE END OF JUNE ARE OBVIOUS.
IF A DEAL IS REACHED, MANY
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS ON IRAN WOULD
BE LIFTED.
GULF NATIONS WORRY THAT WILL
ENABLE IRAN TO MAKE MORE
MISCHIEF IN THE REGION THROUGH
PROXIES LIKE HEZBOLLAH IN SYRIA,
AND THE SHIITE HOUTHI REBELS IN
YEMEN.
THE SAUDIS HAVE LED A MONTH-LONG
BOMBING CAMPAIGN THERE AGAINST
THAT UPRISING.
TODAY, RHODES SOUGHT TO PROVIDE
ASSURANCE THE DEAL IS ONLY ABOUT
ONE THING.
>> THIS IS A NUCLEAR DEAL WE'RE
DOING ON THE MERITS OF THE DEAL
ITSELF, NOT AS A PART OF A
CHANGE BROADLY IN THE U.S.-IRAN
RELATIONSHIP.
>> Reporter: TODAY'S SUMMIT ALSO
COES OMVER HOW TO CONDUCT THE
REGION-WIDE FIGHT AGAINST
"ISLAMIC STATE" MILITANTS.
AND SYRIA'S CIVIL WAR, WHERE THE
GULF STATES WANT WASHINGTON TO
BE MORE AGGRESSIVE.
THE PRESIDENT, WHO SPOKE JUST A
SHORT TIME AGO, TRIED TO USE THE
GATHERING TO REASSURE HIS
PARTNERS.
>> WE DISCUSSED NOT ONLY THE
IRANIAN NUCLEAR DEAL AND THE
POTENTIAL FOR US TO ENSURE THAT
IRAN IS NOT OBTAINING A NUCLEAR
WEAPON AND TRIGGERING A NUCLEAR
ARMSES RACE IN THE REGION, BUT
WE ALSO DISCUSSED OUR CONCERNS
ABOUT IRAN'S DESTABILIZING
ACTIVITIES IN THE REGION.
>> Reporter: AT DAY'S END,
THEY DID ANNOUNCE AGREEMENTS ON
WAYS TO BEEF YOU WANT U.S. GULF
DEFENSE PARTNERSHIP IN AREAS
LIKE MARITIME SECURITY, MISSILE
DEFENSE, AND CYBER SECURITY.
BUT DESPITE THE COOPERATIVE
STEPS ANNOUNCED TODAY, THIS
U.S.-GULF RELATIONSHIP IS LIKELY
TO HIT MORE ROUGH PATCHES AHEAD.
>> Woodruff: AND JOINING ME
NOW FROM CAMP DAVID IS MARGARET.
MARGARET, WELCOME.
SO YOU WERE TELLING US A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT WHAT'S COME OUT OF
THIS.
TELL US MORE.
FILL IN SOME OF THE DETAILS.
>> Warner: WELL, JUDY, WHAT
THE GULF COUNTRIES GOT WAS A
VERY ROBUST STATEMENT BY THE
PRESIDENT AND IN THIS JOINT
STATEMENT, THAT THE SECURITY OF
THE GULF STATES IS VERY MUCH IN
THE NATIONAL SECURITY INTEREST
OF THE UNITED STATES AND THE
U.S. WILL USE ITS POWER, FRANKLY
INCLUDING MILITARY POWER, TO
SECURE THOSE STATES FROM ANY
THREAT FROM THE OUTSIDE, ANY
KIND OF AGGRESSION FROM THE
OUTSIDE.
AND THEN AS I JUST REPORT, IN
SPECIFIC AREAS, THE U.S. WILL
ALSO WORK WITH THESE PARTNERS TO
BEEF UP THEIR OWN CAPABILITIES
IN COUNTERING A SYMMETRIC
WARFARE, WHETHER COUNTER
ATTACKS, OR CYBER ATTACKS.
FROM THAT POINT VIEW, THE GULF
STATES GOT SOMETHING.
BUT THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION DID
NOT GET-- OR LET ME PUT IT THIS
WAY-- ALL IT GOT ON THE IRAN
NUCLEAR TALKS FRONT WAS A
STATEMENT BY THE EMIR OF QATAR,
WHO APPEARED WITH THE PRESIDENT
AFTERWARDS, AND SAID THE HOPE
WAS THAT AN IRAN NUCLEAR DEAL
WOULD HAVE A STABILIZING EFFECT
IN THE REGION.
THAT IS NOT EXACTLY WHAT THE
ADMINISTRATION WANTED, BUT IT IS
SOMETHING.
>> Woodruff: SO, MARGARET,
DOES THAT MEAN FELL SHORT ON THE
IRAN SIDE AND THE GULF STATES
DIDN'T GET NECESSARILY WHAT THEY
WANTED -- NOBODY IS GOING HOME
WITH EVERYTHING THEY WANTED.
>> Warner: ABSOLUTELY, JUDY.
ON THE U.S. SIDE, WHAT THE U.S.
HAD REALLY HOPED FOR WAS AN
ENDORSEMENT OF PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
ARGUMENT THE BEST WAY TO KEEP
IRAN FROM BECOMING A
DESTABILIZING FORCE IS THIS
DIPLOMATIC TRACK.
THAT THEY DID NOT GET THAT KIND
OF ENDORSEMENT.
THE GULF STATES,AISE REPORTED
EARLIER, WANTED A NATO-LIKE
DEFENSE TREATY.
AS ONE OFFICIAL SAID,"WE'VE
ALWAYS HAD A GENTLEMAN'S
AGREEMENT.
NOW WE WANT IT ON PAPER."
THEY DID NOT GET THAT.
BEN RHODES WAS FRANK ABOUT WHY.
IT'S NOT JUST THAT IT'S VERY
HARD TO GET IT THROUGH THE
SENATE.
THAT WOULD TAKE YEARS, BUT THESE
ARE ALL DEMOCRACIES, THE U.S.
AND CANADA AND ITS EUROPEAN YOUR
PARTNERS, AND THE GULF STATES
ARE NOT DEMOCRACIES.
THEY ARE VERY UNAPOLOGETIC ABOUT
IT.
THE AMBASSADOR FROM THE U.A.E.
LAST WEEK SAID, PUBLICLY, "NO,
WE DON'T SHARE YOUR DEMOCRATIC
VALUES BUT
PARTNERS IN SIX CONFLICTS--" FOR
EXAMPLE IN THE CONTINENT FLICT
RIGHT NOW IN SYRIA.
THERE'S A REAL DIVISION THERE,
AND AS RHODES SAID TODAY NATO IS
FOUNDED ON A LOT MORE THAN JUST
DEFENSE.
>> Woodruff: ELIZABETMARG JOINIM
CAMP DAVID, THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT
FORCES HAVE REPORTEDLY BEEN
MAKING PROGRESS IN THEIR
CAMPAIGN AGAINST BOKO HARAM.
WINNING BACK VILLAGES FROM THE
ISLAMIC MILITANT GROUP IN RECENT
WEEKS.
BUT THERE HAS BEEN SPILLOVER
INTO NEIGHBORING CAMEROON, WITH
INCREASED INCURSIONS BY FLEEING
EXTREMISTS.
LINDSEY HILSUM OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS WAS GIVEN RARE
ACCESS TO THE SPECIAL FORCES IN
THAT COUNTRY, AS THEY STRUGGLE
TO KEEP BOKO HARAM AT BAY.
>> Reporter: WE'RE ON OUR WAY
TOWARDS THE BORDER WITH NIGERIA,
SPEEDING ALONG IN A CAMEROONIAN
MILITARY CONVOY.
THE VILLAGES ARE EVER MORE
REMOTE, THE LAND PARCHED AND
ROCKY, WE'RE DRIVING THROUGH
TERRITORY BOKO HARAM WANTS TO
OCCUPY, PAST PEOPLE THEY WANT TO
RULE.
THE TROOPS ARE HERE FOR OUR
PROTECTION BECAUSE IN BOKO
HARAM'S EYES FOREIGNERS ARE
VALUABLE COMMODITIES FOR KIDNAP.
WE'RE GOING TO A REMOTE OUTPOST
WHERE THERE WAS FIGHTING THIS
VERY MORNING.
WE'RE VERY NEAR THE BORDER NOW,
JUST WHERE THE INCURSIONS BY
BOKO HARAM AND CLASHES ARE
HAPPENING ALL THE TIME.
I'M WITH THE RAPID REACTION
FORCE, THE ELITE OF THE
CAROONMEIAN ARMY, TRAINED BY TH.
THEY'VE BORN THE BRUNT OF THESE
BATTLES WITH BOKO HARAM BUT THEY
HAVEN'T WON YET.
THE OUTPOST AT ZELEVET IS LESS
THAN HALF A KILOMETER FROM THE
BORDER, NOW THE NIGERIAN ARMY
HAS STARTED TO FLUSH THEM OUT OF
THE FORESTS BEYOND, BOKO HARAM
IS HIDING IN MOUNTAIN CAVES AND
RAIDING INTO CAMEROON MORE
FREQUENTLY.
THEY AMBUSHED A PATROL LAST
SATURDAY.
SATURDAY. >> (translated
): WE WERE SHOT
>> (translated): WE
WERE SHOT AT FROM JUST OVER
THERE.
AT FROM JUST OVER THERE.
WE RETURNED FIRE AND AT THE END
OF THIS CONTACT WE COUNTED OUR
CASUALTIES: TWO DEAD AND FOUR
INJURED INCLUDING ONE CIVILIAN.
>> Reporter: AMONGST THE
INJURED, NOW IN THE MILITARY
HOSPITAL, THE PLATOON COMMANDER,
HE WAS EXPECTING THIS.
HE WAS EXPECTING THIS. >>
(translated): THEY HAD
>> (translated): THEY
HAD ALREADY LEFT A LETTER WITH A
ALREADY LEFT A LETTER WITH A
BULLET IN IT AT OUR BASE, 200
METERS INSIDE OUR BORDERS.
IT WAS A THREAT THAT THEY WOULD
ATTACK.
>> Reporter: THE NEXT DAY, WE'RE
IN ANOTHER CONVOY, EVEN MORE
HEAVILY ARMED FOR OUR
PROTECTION.
WE'RE HEADING TO BIA, A BORDER
VILLAGE THAT WAS ATTACKED BY
BOKO HARAM LAST MONTH.
AS WE ARRIVE, THE VILLAGERS LINE
THE ROUTE, THEY'RE USED TO DAILY
MILITARY PATROLS NOW, THEY KNOW
THE SOLDIERS WILL GATHER THEM
TOGETHER UNDER THE TREES IN THE
VILLAGE CENTER.
THE WOMEN SIT SEPARATELY, THEY
TELL ME BOKO HARAM KILLED TEN
PEOPLE AND KIDNAPPED THREE GIRLS
IN THE RAID.
IN THE RAID. >> (
translated): WE WERE
>> (translated): WE
WERE SLEEPING WHEN THEY CAME.
SLEEPING WHEN THEY CAME.
IT WAS MIDNIGHT.
SUDDENLY WE HEARD GUNFIRE SO WE
WOKE UP.
MOTHERS GATHERED UP THEIR BABIES
AND RAN, SO DID THE MEN.
THEY SET FIRE TO HOUSES AND ALL
OUR BELONGINGS WERE BURNT.
WE HAVE NOTHING LEFT, ABSOLUTELY
NOTHING.
>> Reporter: THE PEOPLE OF BIA
ARE FROM THE KANURI TRIBE WHICH
STRADDLES THE BORDER.
MOST BOKO HARAM FIGHTERS ARE
KANURIS, AND SOME BOYS FROM THIS
VILLAGE HAVE BEEN RECRUITED.
VILLAGE ELDERS SAY THEY'RE
CAUGHT BETWEEN THE TWO SIDES,
AND THAT'S WHY THEY WERE
ATTACKED.
ATTACKED. >> (translated
): THE SOLDIERS
>> (translated): THE
SOLDIERS SAID THERE WERE BOKO
HARAM IN
SAID THERE WERE BOKO HARAM IN
THIS VILLAGE, BUT WE SAID "NO."
THEN THEY SAID IF YOU CATCH ONE
YOU MUST HAND HIM OVER TO US,
AND IF YOU REFUSE WE'LL DO
EXACTLY THE SAME TO YOU AS WE
WOULD TO HIM.
THE MILITARY THREATENED US.
>> Reporter: SOLDIERS PATROL THE
VILLAGE, UNDER PRESSURE THE
VILLAGERS DID INDEED TURN OVER A
LOCAL BOY WHO HAD JOINED BOKO
HARAM, AND THE APRIL ATTACK WAS
THE JIHADIS' REVENGE.
BOUKAR MALLOUM SHOWS ME HIS
COMPOUND.
TWO OF HIS RELATIVES WERE BURNT
ALIVE, HE SAYS.
BOKO HARAM SET FIRE ONLY TO THE
HOUSES OF THOSE WHO REFUSED TO
COLLABORATE WITH THEM, THEY HAD
INTELLIGENCE, THEY KNEW WHICH
HOUSES TO TARGET.
THE SOLDIERS SAY THAT PROVES
SOME ARE ACTING AS INFORMERS,
AND THEY'LL ALREADY HAVE CALLED
BOKO HARAM BY MOBILE TO TELL
THEM OF OUR PRESENCE.
THEY DON'T TRUST THE VILLAGERS,
THEIR ENEMY'S KINSMEN.
>> THEY'RE BROTHERS AND SISTERS,
CHILDREN, OTHERS, ALL THE LIKE
PEOPLE OF THE SAME FAMILY.
IT'S NOT EASY FOR SOMEONE TO
GIVE UP A BROTHER OR SISTER EVEN
IF IT'S THE DEVIL.
>> Reporter: OUR LAST JOURNEY,
TO MINAWA, THE REFUGEE CAMP
WHERE 35,000 NIGERIANS HAVE
FLED.
IN THE LAST TWO WEEKS THEY'VE
REGISTERED ANOTHER 2,000.
THOSE WHO'VE BEEN HERE FOR A
YEAR OR MORE SUSPECT THAT THE
NEW ARRIVALS ARE FAMILY MEMBERS
OF BOKO HARAM FIGHTERS SUDDENLY
UNDER PRESSURE FROM THE NIGERIAN
ARMY.
THEIR PROOF?
THE NEWCOMERS ARE VAGUE ABOUT
THEIR ORIGINS, AND THEY'VE WIPED
THE SIM CARDS ON THEIR PHONES.
SINCE THE BEGINNING OF THIS
YEAR, THE CAMEROONIAN ARMY HAS
BROUGHT A MODICUM OF PEACE,
KIDNAPPING AND KILLING HAS
DECREASED.
BUT UNTIL NIGERIAN FORCES TAKE
FULL CONTROL OF BOKO HARAM
AREAS, PEOPLE IN CAMEROON'S FAR
NORTH WILL NEVER FEEL SAFE FROM
THE MEN IN CAVES ACROSS THE
BORDER.
>> Woodruff: TODAY THE
REPUBLICAN-CONTROLLED SENATE PUT
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S TRADE DEAL
WITH ASIA BACK ON TRACK, WITH A
MOVE THAT CAN CLEAR THE WAY FOR
A FINAL VOTE TO GIVE THE
PRESIDENT AUTHORITY TO NEGOTIATE
THE PACT.
THIS WEEK WE'VE SPOKEN TO
LEADING SENATORS AND THE HEAD OF
A MAJOR LABOR UNION.
NOW, HARI SREENIVASAN GETS A
BUSINESS PERSPECTIVE.
>> Sreenivasan: IT COMES FROM
THE U. S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE,
WHICH REPRESENTS THREE MILLION
BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYERS.
IT HAS BEEN PUSHING HARD FOR THE
DEAL.
JOHN MURPHY IS A SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT WHO FOCUSES ON TRADE
AND JOINS ME NOW.
SO, WHY IN YOUR OPINION IS THIS
A GOOD DEAL FOR YOU AND YOUR
MEMBERS?
>> WELL, TRADE HAS RISEN TO THE
TOP OF THE AGENDA IN WASH
BECAUSE IT'S ONE OF THE BEST
WAYS WE HAVE TO DRIVE ECONOMIC
GROWTH AND JOB CREATION HERE AT
HOME.
IT'S ALREADY PROVIDED ABOUT A
THIRD OF OUR ECONOMIC GROWTH
OVER THE PAST FIVE YEARS.
BUT WE HOPE IT CAN DO A LOT
MORE.
ON TOP OF THE 40 MILLION JOBS
THAT DEPEND ON TRADE TODAY, ON
TOP OF THE ONE IN THREE ACHES,
OR FARM THAT DEPEND ON TRADE,
BUT IF YOU DIG INTO IT A LITTLE
BIT, YOU FIND THAT THE PLAYING
FIELD FOR AMERICAN COMPANIES AND
THE WORKERS THEY EMPLOY REALLY
ISN'T ALWAYS LEVEL.
AS WE'RE SHIPPING GOODS,
SERVICES AROUND THE WORLD, WE
FIND THEY OFTEN FACE TRADE
BARRIERS, TARIFFS THAT ARE IN
THE DOUBLE DEJITZ AND OTHER
KINDS OF NON-TARIFF BARRIERS
THAT SHUT OUT MADE IN U.S.A.
PRODUCTS.
TRADE AGREEMENTS ARE ONE WAY WE
HAVE TO TEAR DOWN THE BARRIERS.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
CRITICISMS WE'VE HEARD IN IS WHY
IS THIS BEING DONE IN SECRET?
ONE REPORTER FOUND A CORRIDOR
WHERE MEMBERS OF CONGRESS HAVE
TO KEEP THEIR PHONES OFF.
WHY NOT NAIK PUBLIC?
>> THE DEBATE ABOUT TRADE
PROMOTION AUTHORITY IS IN PART A
WAY TO REGULARIZE THE WAY THESE
NEGOTIATIONS TAKE PLACE.
TRADE PROMOTION AUTHORITY IS
ABOUT ENSURING THAT THE CONGRESS
AND THE WHITE HOUSE ACTUALLY
WORK TOGETHER ON TRADE.
IT'S A COMMONSENSE NOTION BUT
ONE WE DON'T GET ENOUGH OF HERE
IN THE CITY.
SO THIS BILL, IN ADDITION TO
LAYING OUT THE PARAMETERS FOR
THE WHITE HOUSE CONSULTING WITH
THE CONGRESS, AND THE CONGRESS
HOLDING THE WHITE HOUSE
ACCOUNTABLE, IT WOULD LAY OUT
NEW PROVISIONS TO ENSURE THAT
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS CAN REVIEW
TEXTS.
AT THE END OF THE DAY, THOUGH,
IT'S IMPORTANT TO HAVE A AGREE
OF CONFIDENTIALITY IN
NEGOTIATING TEXTS.
AFTER ALL, A HIGH SCHOOL
FOOTBALL COACH DOESN'T WANT TO
SHARE HIS GAME PLAN WITH THE
OPPOSING TEAM.
YOU RISK GIVING AWAY SHOWING
YOUR SENSITIVITIES AND RED LIEPS
AND AT THE END OF THE DAY THAT
COULD RESULT IN A WEAKER
AGREEMENT THAT IS NOT IN THE
INTEREST OF AMERICAN WORKERS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE HEAD OF A
LABOR UNION ON THIS PROGRAM SAID
60,000 FACTORIES HAVE CLOSED
SINCE NAFTA, AND THAT THERE ARE
MANY PARTS OF THIS AGREEMENT
THAT ARE MODELED ON NAFTA OR
PREVIOUS TRADE AGREEMENTS.
WHAT KINDS OF PROTECTIONS ARE
TRE FHEOR AMERICAN JOBS?
>> WELL, ACTUALLY, IN THE PAST
20 YEARS, THE OUTPUT OF AMERICAN
MANUFACTURING IS UP BY ABOUT
80%.
AMERICAN MANUFACTURING HAS DONE
QUITE WELL, ESPECIALLYCE THE
RECESSION, WE'RE SEEING NEW
GROWTH.
WE'RE SEEING HIRING.
BUT THERE'S TRUTH IN THIS THAT
AMERICAN MANUFACTURERS ARE
EMPLOYING FEWER WORKERS.
THAT'S BECAUSE THERE'S BEEN A
PRODUCTIVITY REVOLUTION.
THERE'S INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGIES, INCREASINGLY
SOPHISTICATE CAPITAL GOODS THAT
ALLOW THEM TO MAKE MORE PRODUCTS
WITH FEWER WORKERS.
AND THAT'S A REALITY IN THE
GLOBAL ECONOMY TODAY THAT WE ALL
HAVE TO WRESTLE WITH.
WHAT WE NEED MOST OF ALL,
THOUGH, IS MORE CUSTOMERS FOR
AMERICAN MANUFACTURERS SO THEY
CAN MAKE THE GOODS HERE WITH
AMERICAN WORKERS AND SELL THEM
AROUND THE WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THERE'S
SOME CONCERN THAT VIETNAM IS NOT
A FREE-MARKET COUNTRY.
SOMETIMES THE AVERAGE WAGE THERE
IS 56 CENTS AN HOUR.
IF I'M AN AMERICAN COMPANY,
WOULD I CHOOSE TO MAKE, LET'S
SAY, SOCKS FOR $10 AN HOUR IN
THE U.S. OR THROUGH THIS TRADE
AGREEMENT, WOULDN'T I WANT TO
OFFSHORE SHOWS JOBS TO A MUCH,
MUCH CHEAPER MARKET?
>> WELL, WAGES REFLECT
PRODUCTIVITY.
AND THE REALITY IS AMERICAN
WAGES ARE A LOT HIGHER BECAUSE
AMERICAN WORKERS ARE THAT MUCH
MORE PRODUCTIVE.
WHAT WE NEED IS A LEVEL PLAYING
FIELD.
AND THAT'S WHY THESE TRADE
AGREEMENTS BY SWEEPING WEIGHT
TARIFF BARRIERS ARE IN THE
AMERICAN INTEREST.
OUR MARKET'S PRETTY MUCH WIDE
OPEN.
BUT THE OTHER MARKETS WE FACE,
SUCH AS VIETNAM, THEY HAVE
TARIFFS IN THE DOUBLING AND
TRIPLE DIGITS THAT SHUT OUT
AMERICAN FARM GOODS AND
MANUFACTURING PRODUCTS.
BY HAVING THAT LEVEL PLAYING
FIELD, YOU HELP AMERICAN WORKERS
HERE TO SHIP THEIR GOODS THERE.
WE ALREADY HAVE ONE-WAY FREE
TRADE WITH GOOD COMING IN.
>> Sreenivasan: ANOTHER
CONCERN IS THIS WOULD GIVE
CORPORATIONING A RIGHT TO SUE
GOVERNMENTS NORTH IN OUR COURTS,
BUT IN THESE TRIBUNALS, AND
SOMETIMES THE THREATS OR THE
FINES ARE SO SIGNIFICANT, THAT
GOVERNMENTS WATER DOWN THEIR OWN
REGULATIONS, WHETHER
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS,
WORKER PROTECTIONS AND EVEN
FOREIGN COMPANIES THAT WORK IN
THE UNITED STATES, COULD DO THAT
TO US.
>> YOU KNOW, I THINK IN THIS
DEBATE, YOU'RE HEARING CONCERN
ABOUT THIS BECAUSE MOST OF THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE HAVE NEVER HEARD
OF THESE THINGS.
THERE'S A REASON FOR THAT.
THEY'VE BEEN AROUND FOR DECADES.
THERE ARE THOUSANDS OF
AGREEMENTS AROUND THE WORLD THAT
HAVE THESE PROVISIONS, BUT IN
THE UNITED STATES, THEY'RE
ALMOST NEVER INVOKED.
THERE HAVE ONLY BEEN 17
OCCASIONS IN THE PAST FOUR
DECADES WHEN ANYONE HAS BROUGHT
ONE OF THESE CASES AGAINST THE
UNITED STATES, AND THE UNITED
STATES HAS NEVER LOST A CASE.
THAT'S BECAUSE WE HAVE RULE OF
LAW HERE AND COMPANIES USE THE
DOMESTIC COURTS.
WHAT THESE ARE MOST USEFUL FOR,
THOUGH, IS WHEN AMERICAN
COMPANIES ARE DOING BUSINESS
ABROAD IN COUNTRY WHERE'S THE
RULE OF LAW ISN'T SO STRONG.
>> Sreenivasan: SO A FINAL
QUESTION FOR YOU, WHETHER IT'S
ON FOOD OR PRESCRIPTION DRUGS OR
I SHOULD SAY PHARMACEUTICALS,
THERE'S THIS CONCERN WE WON'T
HAVE THE ENFORCEMENT TEETH TO
MAKE SURE OTHER COUNTRIES ARE
PLAYING BY THESE SHARED RULES.
>> WELL, THAT'S ACTUALLY AN
ARGUMENT FOR THE AGREEMENTS.
RIGHT NOW, OFTENTIMES WE'VE GOT
NOTHING.
THESE NEW AGREEMENTS HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO WRITE NEW RULES
THAT WILL PROTECT THE
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY THAT 40
MILLION AMERICAN JOBS DEPEND ON.
THEY WILL HAVE RULES TO ENSURE
THAT LABOR RIGHTS ARE NOT
WATERED DOWN IN THE INTEREST TO
TRY TO ATTRACT INVESTMENT.
AND THERE'S ALSO ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTIONS THAT ARE CUTTING NEW
GROUND.
SO I THINK FROM ACROSS THE
BOARD, THAT'S WHY YOU SEE
GROWING SUPPORT.
THAT'S WHY YOU HAVE 65 SENATORS
VOTING FOR THIS TODAY TO MOVE
FORWARD.
THAT'S WHY YOU HAVE THE WHOLE
BUSINESS COMMUNITY SUPPORTING IT
DISPLAWR JOHN MURPHY, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: NEXT, RAISING WAGES
FOR THE LOWEST-PAID WORKERS.
ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT PAUL
SOLMAN LOOKS AT WHY SOME
COMPANIES USE IT TO BOOST THEIR
BOTTM LOINES.
IT'S PART OF OUR ONGOING
REPORTING, "MAKING SENSE," WHICH
AIRS EVERY THURSDAY ON THE
NEWSHOUR.
>> THERE ARE NECESSITIES AND
THERE ARE WANTS.
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
>> Reporter: FORGET HIS WANTS,
HEALTH INSURANCE CLAIMS SERVICER
KENDRICK BROWN HAS BARELY BEEN
ABLE TO AFFORD LIFE'S
NECESSITIES, LIKE A CAR AFTER
HIS WAS TOTALED.
>> MY INSURANCE PAID OFF WHAT
THE CAR WAS WORTH, BUT, AS FAR
AS WHAT I HAD BORROWED TO
ACTUALLY PURCHASE THE CAR, I
STILL OWED.
ONCE YOU GET IN SUCH A HOLE,
YOU'RE LIKE, WOULD IT MAKE MORE
SENSE FOR ME TO ACTUALLY, YOU
KNOW, FILE BANKRUPTCY?
>> Reporter: SO WHEN HIS
EMPLOYER, AETNA, RECENTLY,
VOLUNTARILY AND SUDDENLY RAISED
ITS MINIMUM WAGE TO $16 AN HOUR.
>> AFTER TAXES, IT'S SOMEWHERE
BETWEEN $100 AND $150 DOLLARS
EVERY CHECK?
AND, THAT GOES A LONG WAY.
THAT GOES A LONG WAY.
>> Reporter: BROWN IS ONE O
ROUGHLY 6,000 LOWEST-PAID AETNA
EMPLOYEES, OUT OF A WORKFORCE OF
49,000, WHO GOT RAISES THIS
SPRING.
ON AVERAGE, 11%, WITH SOME AS
HIGH AS 33%.
CALL CENTERS LIKE THIS ONE IN
FRESNO, CALIFORNIA ARE HOME TO
MANY OF THE FIRM'S LOWEST PAID
WORKERS.
WE VISITED ON THE PAYDAY THE
RAISES TOOK EFFECT.
>> EVERYONE WENT IN AND LOOKED
AND WERE LIKE,
"OH, IT'S THERE!"
YOU KNOW?
THIS, IT'S REALLY THERE.
>> Reporter: KRISTEN SARGENT,
AMONG THE 233 WORKERS HERE WHOSE
PAYCHECKS ROSE.
>> IT'S LIKE, ON PAPER!
YOU KNOW?
IT'S THERE!
IT WENT INTO EFFECT!
>> Reporter: SARGENT WILL EARN
OVER A DOLLAR MORE AN HOUR,
LIVES SOME 40 MILES FROM THE
OFFICE.
>> MY HUSBAND WORKS IN
CONSTRUCTION.
AND OF COURSE, THAT'S A SEASONAL
JOB.
AND SO, WE'RE DEPENDENT ON JUST
ME.
WE'RE A FAMI OF LYFIVE.
I HAVE THREE KIDS, IT'S HARD TO
TELL THEM THEY CAN'T GO HANG OUT
WITH THE OTHER KIDS, AND DO WHAT
THE OTHER KIDS ARE DOING, JUST
BECAUSE YOU DON'T HAVE THE
MONEY.
>> Reporter: ERICA GARCIA IS
GRATEFUL FOR HER RAISE.
ONE OF HER YOUNG SONS IS STILL
IN DAYCARE.
> I'VE ALREADY DELEGATED THAT
MONEY TOWARDS DAYCARE FOR MY NEW
BABY.
>> Reporter: AND NEXT YEAR AETNA
ALSO PLANS TO OFFER LOWER-COST
BENEFITS TO THOSE BELOW A
CERTAIN INCOME THRESHOLD.
C.E.O. MARK BERTOLINI IS THE
DRIVING FORCE.
>> IT'S NOT JUST ABOUT PAYING
THEM MORE.
IT'S ABOUT CREATING FOR THEM A
HIGHER LEVEL OF PERSONAL
DISPOSABLE INCOME THAT ALLOWS
THEM TO ENGAGE IN THE ECONOMY,
FEELART POF THEIR COMMUNITIES
AND FEEL GOOD ABOUT THE PLACE
THEY WORK AT.
>> Reporter: THE C.E.O. DOES
HAVE HIS REASONS.
>> WE NOW HAVE A LOT OF
FINANCIAL CAPITAL IN THE SYSTEM.
WE CAN BORROW MONEY CHEAPLY AS
CORPORATIONS, $3.8 TRILLION
AROUND THE WORLD IN CAPITAL
SITTING IN, INSIDE OF COMPANIES.
SO LET'S INVEST IN HUSBAND OR
SCARCE RESOURCE, WHICH IS
TALENT, A MOTIVATED, ENGAGED,
PRESENT WORKER.
AND LET'S PUT AT RISK SOME OF
OUR CAPITAL TO DO IT.
>> Reporter: SO AFTER DECADES IN
WHICH CORPORATE AMERICA WAS ALL
ABOUT "MAXIMIZING SHAREHOLDER
VALUE," AETNA IS RAISING WAGES
AT THE BOTTOM UNILATERALLY.
GRAVITY PAYMENTS, A 120-PERSON
CREDIT CARD PAYMENT PROCESSING
FIRM, IS GOING EVEN FURTHER.
RAISING ITS MINIMUM TO $70,000 A
YEAR
EFFECTIVELY DOUBLING THE PAY OF
ITS 30 LOWEST-PAID WORKERS.
THE GAP, STARBUCKS, WALMART AND
MCDONALDS HAVE ALSO ANNOUNCED
INCREASES, PERHAPS TIED TO
PUBLIC PRESSURE, MINIMUM WAGE
CAMPAIGNS, PICKETING.
ECONOMIST ARIN DUBE.
>> THERE'S GROWING ATTENTION AND
PUBLIC PRESSURE TO RAISE WAGES
AT THE BOTTOM SO I FIND IT
REALLY INTERESTING THAT THESE
COMPANIES AREN'T JUST SIMPLY
RAISING WAGES FOR ALL THEIR
WORKERS, BUT, ALSO RAISING
SPECIFICALLY AT THE BOTTOM.
>> Reporter: DUBE HAS STUDIEDE N
WORKER PRODUCTIVITY.
>> WHEN COMPANIES RAISE WAGES,
THEY ACTUALLY DO REAP THE
BENEFITS OF INCREASED
PRODUCTIVITY VIA INCREASED
EFFORT, MORALE, LOWER TURNOVER,
BETTER POOL OF APPLICANTS THEY
CAN SELECT FROM.
>> Reporter: OR, AS AETNA'S
C.E.O. PUTS IT:
>> THE IDEA WAS IF THAT PEOPLE
CAN'T MAKE ENDS MEET AT HOME
WITH FOOD AND WITH BENEFITS,
HEALTH, HEALTH CARE IN
PARTICULAR, HOW CAN THEY BE
PRESENT, ENGAGED, KNOWLEDGE
WORKERS IN THE WORKPLACE WHEN
THEY COME TO WORK?
>> Reporter: ESPECIALLY SINCE
THEIR JOBS SERVICING INSURANCE
CUSTOMERS CAN BE SOMETHING OF A
TRIAL.
>> YOU MAY HAVE TO HIT THE MUTE
BUTTON AND JUST GO--
(DEEP BREATHS).
OKAY, BACK IN, HERE WE GO!
>> I TRY TO STAY UPBEAT.
AND JUST, YOU KNOW, JUST REMIND
THEM HEY, WE'RE ON THE SAME
TEAM.
SOMETIMES THEY DON'T BELIEVE
THAT, BUT, I DO MY BEST TO LET
THEM KNOW THAT.
>> Reporter: C.E.O. BERTOLINI
HOPES TO IMPROVE CUSTOMERS'
SATISFACTION.
THEIR FEEDBACK HAS NOT BEEN KIND
TO INSURANCE COMPANIES.
>> YOU GUYS ARE WORSE THAN THE
CABLE INDUSTRY AND YOU'RE WORSE
THAN THE AIRLINES.
NOT HIGH PRAISE.
AND THE ONLY THING THAT SAVES US
IS THAT WE'RE HIGHER THAN
CONGRESS.
>> Reporter: ANOTHER GOAL OF THE
WAGE HIKE IS TO REDUCE TURNOVER
COSTS, SOME $120 MILLION A YEAR.
>> THE HIGHER YOUR TURNOVER, THE
MORE DIFFICULT IT IS TO CARRY ON
A CULTURE THAT'S FOCUSED ON
TAKING CARE OF CUSTOMERS, IN A
KNOWLEDGEABLE AND A MORE
EMPATHIC WAY.
>> I'M GOING TO PAY THE WHOLE
AMOUNT, NOT JUST THE PAST DUE
AMOUNT THIS TIME.
>> Reporter: AND IT WOULDN'T BE
A SHOCK IF KENDRICK BROWN WERE
NOW BE A MORE PRODUCTIVE WORKER.
>> I DON'T HAVE TO STRESS THAT
OH MY GOD, ON MY BREAK I NEED TO
CALL AND MAKE A PAYMENT
ARRANGEMENT WITH COMCAST.
OR, OH MY GOD, ON MY LUNCH BREAD
FIGURE OUT HOW I'M GONNA PAY THE
REST OF THAT BILL.
>> Reporter: MORE MONEY MAKES
ERICA GARCIA LESS INCLINED TO
LEAVE AETNA.
>> I THINK WHAT IT DOES IS HELPS
ME FEEL COMFORTABLE IN MY
DECISION THAT I WANTED TO, TO
STAY WITH AETNA LONG-TERM.
>> Reporter: NOW, THE PAY RAISE
AND BENEFIT PROGRAM FOR LOW-WAGE
WORKERS WILL COST AETNA ONLY $26
MILLION DOLLARS, WHILE THE
C.E.O. ALONE MADE $15.6 MILLION
LAST YEAR, THOUGH MOST OF IT IN
STOCK OPTIONS.
SO, YOU'RE REALLY NOT TALKING
ABOUT A HUGE INVESTMENT HERE?
>> MMM, MMM.
>> Reporter: SO, WHY DON'T YOU
DO MORE?
>> WE WILL, OVER TIME.
AS THE COMPANY'S MORE
SUCCESSFUL, WE'LL SHARE IN THAT
SUCCESS.
AND WE'LL FIND DIFFERENT WAYS TO
DO IT.
>> Reporter: AND, IF THE
COMPANY'S NOT MORE SUCCESSFUL?
>> WELL, THEN EVERYBODY SUFFERS.
>> Reporter: INCLUDING AETNA'S
INVESTORS, NOTES ECONOMIST DUBE.
>> IT'LL BE INTERESTING TO SEE
IF THERE'S BEEN A REAL CHANGE IN
THE WAY INVESTORS IN AMERICA
REACT TO THE NEWS OF RISING
LABOR COSTS.
>> Reporter: FOR NOW, THOUGH,
KENDRICK BROWN IS AMONG THOSE
THANKFUL FOR THE INVESTMENT.
>> THAT LIVING CHECK TO CHECK
THING?
IS NOT MY GOAL IN LIFE.
NOT THAT I NEED TO GO OUT AND,
YOU KNOW, SPEND MONEY AND BE
RICH, OR WHATEVER.
BUT, AT THE SAME TIME, JUST BE
COMFORTABLE AND HAPPY.
>> Reporter: AETNA IS BETTING
THAT COMFORTABLE AND HAPPY
WORKERS WILL MEAN LESS
UNCOMFORTABLE AND UNHAPPY
CUSTOMERS, AND IN THE END, A
BETTER BOTTOM LINE.
THIS IS ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT
PAUL SOLMAN REPORTING, HAPPILY,
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: A PIONEER OF THE
FOOD MOVEMENT HAS LONG BEEN
STIRRING THE POT TO GET QUALITY
ORGANIC INTEGRATED INTO
AMERICA'S DIET.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE LATEST
ADDITION TO OUR NEWSHOUR
BOOKSHELF.
>> Brown: NORA POUILLON'S DAY
BEGINS EARLY.
TENDING TO THE HERB GARDEN AT
HER WASHINGTON, D.C. RESTAURANT,
NAMED "NORA," AND THEN WORKING
THROUGH THE MENU WITH HER CHEFS.
ON THIS DAY IT FEATURED GINGERY
CARROT SOUP WITH CREME FRAICHE,
GRILLED SUSTAINABLE SALMON WITH
ROASTED PARSNIPS, RAPINI,
MINNEOLA ORANGE GINGER
VINAGRETTE AND BITTERSWEET
MOLTEN CHOCOLATE CAKE.
IT'S ALL PART OF RUNNING A
RESTAURANT, AND A SPECIAL ONE AT
THAT: THE NATION'S FIRST
CERTIFIED ORGANIC RESTAURANT.
>> YOU HAVE TO LEARN ABOUT THE
SEASON, YOU HAVE TO LEARN ABOUT
THE AGRICULTURE, YOU HAVE TO
LEARN ABOUT THE CHEMISTRY OF
FOOD.
YOU HAVE TO LEARN TO HAVE A
BUDGET, YOU HAVE TO LEARN ABOUT
FOOD COST, ABOUT LABOR COST.
EVERY DAY IS LIKE NEARLY SHOW
TIME, WILL ALL THE PEOPLE SHOW
UP?
>> Brown: POUILLON'S NEW BOOK,
"MY ORGANIC LIFE", TELLS S
IN THE AUSTRIAN ALPS AND LATER
VIENNA.
THEN MOVING IN THE 1960S WITH
HER THEN HUSBAND, A FRENCHMAN,
TO THE UNITED STATES, WHERE SHE
WAS SHOCKED BY THE HIGHLY-
PROCESSED, HORMONE-INFUSED FOOD
SHE FOUND.
>> THE PRODUCE DEPARTMENT WAS
THE SMALLEST DEPARTMENT.
THE ICEBERG LETTUCE WAS
EVERYWHERE, THE ORANGES AND
APPLES AND PEARS, NO FRESH
GARLIC, NO FRESH HERBS, NO NICE
LETTUCES.
I WOULD NEVER FORGET IT.
IN EUROPE, YOU GO FROM LITTLE
PLACE TO PLACE AND YOU GO FROM
YOUR BUTCHER TO YOUR GREEN
GROCER TO THE BAKER AND YOU HAVE
A DISCUSSION.
THE EXPERIENCE OF GOING TO THE
SUPERMARKET WAS DIFFERENT.
>> Brown: AND ALSO YOU WRITE,
WONDER BREAD, THE GREAT STAPLE.
>> ROLLS AND ROLLS OF WONDER
BREAD.
I REMEMBER WHEN PEPPERIDGE FARM
CAME AND IT WAS LIKE WOW, THIS
REVELATION!
>> Brown: SHE STARTED OUT
COOKING FOR FRIENDS, THEN BECAME
A COOKING INSTRUCTOR, BEFORE
OPENING "NORA" IN 1979.
IT WOULD BECOME A GREAT SUCCESS;
A DESTINATION FOR PRESIDENTS.
BUT IN THE BEGINNING, SHE
REMEMBERS, "HEALTHY FOOD" WAS A
TOUGH SELL.
SHE FIRST CALLED IT "ADDITIVE-
FREE," BUT A FRIEND CONVINCED
HER THAT DIDN'T SOUND VERY
TASTY.
>> YOU HAVE TO EDUCATE PEOPLE
THAT IT'S IMPORTANT WHAT THEY
PUT IN THEIR BODIES, VERY
IMPORTANT BECAUSE THAT'S HOW
THEY FEEL AND THAT'S HOW THEY
BEHAVE AND THAT'S HOW THEY
THINK.
I MEAN IN THIS COUNTRY, THE
HEALTH PROBLEMS ARE ENORMOUS.
THE VALUE OF MAKING ORPHANNICS
AVAILABLE TO ALL.
>> IT'S ALWAYS MORE EXPENSIVE
BECAUSE THE COST OF FOOD IS NOT
THE TRUE COST, AND SO MUCH OF
THE FOOD HERE IS SUBSIDIZED, AND
ALL THE BAD FOOD IS SUBSIDIZED,
UNFORTUNATELY.
MY MOTTO IS ALWAYS I PREFER TO
SPEND MY MONEY ON FOOD AND NOT
ON THE DOCTOR.
>> Brown: MUCH HAS CHANGED, OF
COURSE, MAKING ORGANIC FOODS
MORE ACCESS AND I BELIEVE
AFFORDABLE.
SHE HELPED FOUND WASHINGTON,
D.C.'S FIRST PRODUCERS-ONLY
FARMERS MARKET, THE KIND FOUND
IN MANY CITIES AROUND THE
COUNTRY.
SHE WORKS WITH LOCAL GROWERS TO
BUILD A PIPELINE OF SEASONAL
ORGANIC FOOD, CLOSE TO HER
RESTAURANT.
>> YOU CANNOT START OUT YOUR DAY
WITH BACON AND EGGS AND THEN
HAVE FOR LUNCH A BIG HAMBURGER
AND THEN HAVE FOR DINNER PORK
CHOPS AND APPLE PIE.
THAT DOESN'T WORK.
>> Brown: BUT THAT DOESN'T MEAN
YOU CAN'T ENJOY EATING.
>> THIS RESTAURANT, MY POINT WAS
TO SHOW PEOPLE THAT IF YOU HAVE
WHOLESOME, NUTRITIOUS
INGREDIENTS, THEN YOU CAN COOK
WHATEVER YOU WANT.
BUT YOU CAN HAVE ALL OF THESE
THINGS, BUT YOU KNOW NOT ON THE
SAME DAY.
AND IF THE INGREDIENTS
THEMSELVES ARE PURE AND
WHOLESOME, THE I DON'T SEE ANY
POINT IN KEEPING A SPECIAL
DIET.
YOUR DIET IS THE WAY YOU EAT IS
JUST USE CERTIFIED ORGANIC
INGREDIENTS.
>> Brown: THAT CERTIFICATION
COMES FROM THE U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF AGRICULTURE.
IT >>MEANS THAT THEY HAVE NO
PESTICIDES, NO ANTIBIOTICS, NO
HORMONES.
THIS IS ALL VEGETABLES SO IT
WOULDN'T HAVE THAT.
NO FUNGICIDES, BASICALLY NO
PESTICIDES.
>> Brown: COOKING ORGANICALLY,
HAVING AN ORGANIC KITCHEN MEANS,
IT MAKES IT HARDER IN SOME WAYS.
>> FIRST OF ALL, I DEAL WITH 35
DIFFERENT FARMERS.
BECAUSE ONE DOES THE CHICKEN,
ONE DOES ONLY THE BEEF, THE
OTHER ONE DOES ONLY THE PORK.
EVERYONE DOES SOMETHING
DIFFERENT.
SOMEBODY HAS ONLY THE EGGS, THE
MILK, YOGURT.
SO I DEAL WITH ALL THESE FARMERS
AND THEN WHAT HAPPENS IS THEY
DON'T DELIVER EVERYDAY, THEY
DON'T HAVE EVERYTHING EVERY DAY.
SUDDENLY HE DOESN'T HAVE ENOUGH
CHICKENS BECAUSE IT WAS TOO
COLD, THE CHICKENS DIDN'T WANT
TO EAT AND THE CHICKENS THAT
USUALLY WEIGH 3.5 POUNDS
SUDDENLY WEIGH TWO POUNDS.
>> Brown: AND THEN FOR YOU, IT'S
UH-OH.
>> FOR ME, IT'S-- I HAVE NO
CHICKENS!
>> Brown: NO CHICKENS ONE DAY,
SO MORE CREATIVITY REQUIRED IN
THE KITCHEN.
THERE SEEMS TO BE MORE OF THAT
IN AMERICAN KITCHENS THESE DAYS:
THERE ARE NOW WELL OVER 100
CERTIFIED ORGANIC RESTAURANTS IN
THE U.S.
READING AND HOPING TO EAT FOR
THE PBS NEWSHOUR, I'M JEFFREY
BROWN IN WASHINGTON, DC.
>> Ifill: NOW TO OUR NEWSHOUR
SHARES OF THE DAY.
SOMETHING THAT CAUGHT OUR EYE,
THAT MIGHT BE OF INTEREST TO
YOU, TOO.
IT'S SAID TO BE THE WORLD'S
OLDEST-KNOWN LETTER ON
PARCHMENT, AT LEAST IN PRIVATE
HANDS.
IT WAS WRITTEN IN 1,190 FROM ONE
ITALIAN BUSINESSMAN TO ANOTHER.
AND IT'S ON VIEW TO THE PUBLIC
THIS WEEK ONDON, PART OF AN
EXHIBITION FOR STAMP ENTHUSIASTS
AND HISTORICAL-DOCUMENT BUFFS.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE,
SCIENTISTS ARE MAPPING THE
BOTTOM OF THE OCEAN, AND THEY
SENT CAMERAS THREE MILES DEEP TO
CATCH A GLIMPSE OF LIFE THERE.
CHECK OUT THE STORY ON OUR
HOMEPAGE, WHERE YOU CAN SEE
PICTURES AND VIDEO OF RARE SEA
STARS, JELLYFISH AND ASPHALT
VOLCANOS THAT ERUPT ON THE
SEAFLOOR.
THAT'S ALL ON pbs.org/newshour.
TUNE IN LATER THIS EVENING...
ON CHARLIE ROSE: CONAN O'BRIEN
ON HIS CAREER IN LATE NIGHT.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, SAVING SYRIA'S
PRICELESSIQ
FROM THE RAVAGES OF WAR.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
AND I'M JUDY WOODRUFF,
WE'LL SEE YOU
ON-LINE AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW
EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.